# Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Major changes from G3 to G4](#major-changes-from-g3-to-g4)
- [Certificate profiles](#certificate-profiles)
- [Limitations](#limitations)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Support & Contributing](#support--contributing)
- [Disclaimer](#disclaimer)

# Overview

This tool allows you to generate TRIAL (test) certificates for the PKIoverheid G4 hierarchies yourself. It generates a complete hierarchy of certificates resembling a chosen G4 hierarchy. For more information on these hierarchies, please refer to the [PKIoverheid CPS, Section 1.1](https://cps.pkioverheid.nl/pkioverheid-cps-unified-v5.4.html#id__11-overview). 

Use the self-signed certificates to test your own and relying party's readiness for the production PKIoverheid G4 certificates issued by PKIoverheid TSPs. 

For the G3 certificate hierarchy some PKIoverheid TSPs offer TRIAL certificates. However, the G4 hierarchies consists of many different types of certificates, increasing implementation costs for TSPs. Therefore it was deemed most effective for users to be able to generate their own test certificates using a publicly available tool.

# Target audience

Software developers creating applications either using PKIoverheid certificates, or validating signatures created with PKIoverheid certificates, will be the primary audience of the PKIoverheid TRIAL certificates. However, organizations using *commercial off the shelf* (COTS) software in combination with PKIoverheid certificates or signatures created using them, may also wish to test their software stack with the PKIoverheid TRIAL certificates.

# Major changes from G3 to G4

There have been a number of changes from G3 to G4, which you need to be aware of. In depth technical changes are described in the [PKIoverheid CPS](https://cps.pkioverheid.nl) and [Certificate Policy/Programme of Requirements PKIoverheid](https://cp.pkioverheid.nl/), while the functional changes are:  

- Instead of one certificate root, the PKIoverheid G4 consists of multiple Certificate Roots, depending on its trust type (Public, Mandated (eIDAS) and Private). Since Privately trusted roots may be used separately within a specific domain, several Privately trusted Certificate Roots are created. Relying parties should only trust the appropriate Certificate Roots. Please see [https://cert.pkioverheid.nl/](https://cert.pkioverheid.nl/) for details;
- Many more certificate types are available for the G4 than G3, the certificate Common Names reflect this accordingly;
- Intermediate CAs are based upon Subject Type (Natural Persons, Legal Entities or Devices), rather than a validation type, for example the G3's "Organisatie Persoon";
- G3 certificates used a limited number of Policy OIDs, this has been expanded significantly for the G4. This allows the relying party to pinpoint exactly which type of certificate and validation was performed; 
- G4 makes a distinction between Authenticity and Authentication certificates, while G3 only defined Authenticity for both use cases;
- Previously G1 Private Services Server certificate (OID: 2.16.528.1.1003.1.2.8.6) could be used both for `serverAuth` and `clientAuth` (for example in mTLS usage cases). This has been changed in G4. A G4 Private Other Generic Legal Persons Organization Validated Authentication is used for `clientAuth` and G4 Private TLS Generic Devices Organization Validated Server for `serverAuth`. 
- Signature algorithm `RSASSA‐PKCS1‐v1_5` has been designated as legacy by the SOG-IS Crypto Evaluation Scheme and is replaced by `RSASSA-PSS`. This algorithm is used for certificates and CRLs. 

# Certificate profiles

The PKIoverheid G4 hierarchies offer many different types of certificates, each for a different purpose. Please refer to the factsheet [Wees voorbereid de nieuwe generatie pkioverheidcertificaten komen eraan](https://www.logius.nl/onze-dienstverlening/domeinen/toegang/pkioverheid/wees-voorbereid-de-nieuwe-generatie-pkioverheidcertificaten-komen-eraan) (Dutch) or [New generation of PKIoverheid Certificates](https://www.logius.nl/english/pkioverheid/new-generation-pkioverheid-certificates) (English) for details. 

Please be aware certificates generated by this tooling differ from their production counterparts in some aspects: 

- There is no Certificate Policy document and as such these certificates provide no trust whatsoever
- **Serial Numbers** are not generated using a CSPRNG.
- **Issuer** and **Subject** fields do not mention "Staat der Nederlanden" or any of the participating TSPs. Instead, "TRIAL PKIoverheid" and "My TSP" are used. Nevertheless, relying parties should not rely on Subject and Issuer for trust. 
- **Validity** range for end entity certificates defaults to 365 days, which may be different from production certificates;
- **crlDistributionPoints** and **caIssuers** point to `localhost` for TRIAL certificates by default, for the Production environment these point to http://crl.pkioverheid.nl and http://cert.pkioverheid.nl respectively. File names are generated based on the Common Name of the CA certificates.
- **Policy Identifiers** are defined by the [differentation model](https://oid.pkioverheid.nl/) and differ slightly between TRIAL and Production, for example: 

| Certificate type                      | TRIAL                               | Production                          |
|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| System Organization Validation Server | `2.16.528.1.1003.1.2.*41*.15.39.10` | `2.16.528.1.1003.1.2.*44*.15.39.10` | 

# Limitations

All G4 TRIAL certificates are self issued and must not be used for any production purpose and should only be used for testing purposes.

Currently, only the following [G4 Domains](https://cp.pkioverheid.nl/pkioverheid-por-v5.1.html#id__11-overview) have been included:

- G4 Private TLS Generic Devices
- G4 Private Other Generic Natural Persons
- G4 Private Other Generic Legal Persons

## Installation

1. Clone this repository locally
2. You will need Python >3.7 installed. If not already installed, please follow the instructions for your operating system at https://www.python.org;
3. To be able to install additional libraries, you will need to install `pip`. For instructions please refer to https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/tutorials/installing-packages/;
4. (optional) create and activate a virtualenv, see previous hyperlink;
5. Install the packages this repository requires: 
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

# Usage

## Create top level hierarchy

First create the top three layers of the CA hierarchy for a [G4 Domain](https://cp.pkioverheid.nl/pkioverheid-por-v5.1.html#id__11-overview). These are the self-signed Root CA, Domain CA and Issuing (TSP) CA. This command will prompt which for which PKIoverheid G4 domain you'd like to create the private key, certificate and its (empty) Certificate Revocation List (CSR). 

```bash
python create_ca.py
```

## Create end entity certificates

Each end entity certificate requires subject information to be provided separately. This information is provided using a YAML file. Please see any of the files in the `examples/csr` directory.  

Depending on certificate type the `subject` field must contain certain attributes, while others are prohibited. The script will validate your file against the requirements for the selected hierarchy and output any discrepancies. Please note that no validations are performed on the actual contents of each attribute, please refer to the [Programme of Requirements section 7.1.4.2.2](https://cp.pkioverheid.nl/pkioverheid-por-v5.1.html#id__71422-subject-distinguished-name-fields) to determine what information should be included in each field. When run, the script will prompt for which domain the certificate will be signed for. 

```bash
python create_endentity.py <one or more YAML CSR files>
```

The newly generated private keys are located in the `ca/private` directory and the certificates in the `ca/certs` directory. Use as appropriate.

If you'd like to host the CA certificates (as specified in the `authorityInfoAccess` extension) and CRLs (as specified in the `crlDistributionPoints` extension) on the localhost, you can start a minimal webserver:

```bash
bash start_server.sh
```

If you intend to host the certificates and CRLs on another domain modify the `config.yaml` file accordingly. For example:

```yaml
caIssuersBaseUrl: http://localhost/cer
cRLDistributionPointsBaseUrl: http://localhost/crl
```

# File list

| Filename              | Description                                                             |
|-----------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `create_ca.py`        | Script to create the top level CA private keys and certificates         |
| `create_endentity.py` | Script to create any number of end entity private keys and certificates |
| `start_server.sh`     | A minimal webserver to host generated certificates and CRLs             |
| `ca/private/*.key`    | Generated private keys                                                  |
| `ca/certs/*.pem`      | Issued certificates                                                     |
| `ca/crl/*.crl`        | CRLs for the generated CA certificates                                  |
| `examples/csr`        | Example YAML CSR files to create end entity certificates                |

# Requirements

- Python >3.7 

# Support & Contributing

These files are provided as-is and no warranty or support is given. However, you may create a Github issue to discuss issues and enhancements.

# Roadmap

Based on user input, other G4 hierarchies will be added in future releases.

# Disclaimer

This project is provided as-is, without any express or implied warranties, including but not limited to merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Use generated self-signed certificate hierarchies is at your own risk, and the maintainers are not responsible for any security issues, misconfigurations, or unintended consequences. External systems, applications and entities must not trust certificates generated by this tooling. 
